Add an overview section for type mapping (#13738)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/language/types.rst

Trino has a set of built-in data types, described below.
Additional types can be provided by plugins.

.. _type-mapping-overview:

Trino type support and mapping
------------------------------

Connectors to data sources are not required to support all Trino data types
described on this page. If there are data types similar to Trino's that are used
on the data source, the connector may map the Trino and remote data types to
each other as needed.

Depending on the connector and the data source, type mapping may apply
in either direction as follows:

* **Data source to Trino** mapping applies to :ref:`read <sql-read-operations>`
  and :ref:`write operations <sql-write-operations>`, when
  columns with specific types in the data source exist and are read or written
  from Trino. Multiple remote data types may map to the same Trino data type.

* **Trino to data source** mapping applies to any SQL statements that create
  columns on the data source (such as :doc:`/sql/create-table` and
  :doc:`/sql/alter-table`). Multiple Trino data types may map to the same remote

>   data type.

Reviewer: Not exactly correct. It doesn't depend at all on whether columns already exist or not.

`source -> trino` means that any value which gets read from source and needs to be represented in Trino (most commonly SELECT queries).

`trino -> source` means any value in Trino which needs to be represented in remote source (CTAS, INSERT, WHERE predicates etc.)

Reviewer 2: Yeah ... we need to update this @jhlodin  .. turns out I was misunderstanding how this works .. and I am still not sure I get it for the details ..

Author: Interesting. How about, as a rewrite:

> **Data source to Trino** mapping applies to any operation where columns in the data source are read by Trino, such as > a `SELECT` statement, and the underlying source data type needs to be represented by a Trino data type.

> **Trino to data source** mapping applies to write operations and predicates where the SQL statement written in Trino
> must be translated into typing that is compatible with the underlying data source. For example, `CREATE TABLE AS` and > `INSERT` statements specify Trino types that are then mapped to remote types on the data source. Predicates like
> `WHERE` also use Trino to data source mappings in order to ensure that the predicate's syntax can resolve on the
> remote data source.

Does this make any more sense?

Reviewer: Much better. But I'd still recommend to avoid saying "write operations" for the "Trino to data source".

Probably something like `applies to any operation where the columns or expressions in Trino need to be translated into data types or expressions compatible with the underlying data source.`

Author: Applied edits & your suggestion, PTAL

Trino has a set of built-in data types, described below.
Additional types can be provided by plugins.

.. _type-mapping-overview:

Trino type support and mapping
------------------------------

Connectors to data sources are not required to support all Trino data types
described on this page. If there are data types similar to Trino's that are used
on the data source, the connector may map the Trino and remote data types to
each other as needed.

Depending on the connector and the data source, type mapping may apply
in either direction as follows:

> * **Data source to Trino** mapping applies to read and write operations, when

Reviewer 2: link to read and write in the sql overview

  columns with specific types in the data source exist and are read or written

>   from Trino. In this type mapping table, all supported types in the data
>   source should be listed. Multiple remote data types may map to the same Trino

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  from Trino. Multiple remote data types may map to the same Trino
```

That sentence feels like instruction to doc authors instead of users.

Reviewer: Same in the below paragraph.

  data type.

* **Trino to data source** mapping applies to any SQL statements that create
  columns on the data source (such as :doc:`/sql/create-table` and

>   :doc:`/sql/alter-table`). In this type mapping table, all supported data types

Reviewer 3: I think we also need to mention write operations (e.g. `INSERT`, `CREATE TABLE AS SELECT` etc.)

Reviewer 2: sure.. but they are covered by the other direction of mapping... .. the Trino to data source mapping is essentially for DDL statements only..

Reviewer 3: Got it, thanks for the explanation.

Reviewer: Small clarification (to be pedantic) - Trino to data source mapping is used in write operations as well as things like predicate pushdown - basically anywhere we need to convert from Trino's representation to the data source's representation.

Reviewer: No change requested - was just a clarification.

Trino has a set of built-in data types, described below.
Additional types can be provided by plugins.

.. _type-mapping-overview:

Trino type support and mapping
------------------------------

Connectors to data sources are not required to support all Trino data types
described on this page. If there are data types similar to Trino's that are used
on the data source, the connector may map the Trino and remote data types to
each other as needed.

Depending on the connector and the data source, type mapping may apply
in either direction as follows:

* **Data source to Trino** mapping applies to any operation where columns in the
  data source are read by Trino, such as a :doc:`/sql/select` statement, and the
  underlying source data type needs to be represented by a Trino data type.

* **Trino to data source** mapping applies to any operation where the columns
  or expressions in Trino need to be translated into data types or expressions
  compatible with the underlying data source. For example,
  :doc:`/sql/create-table-as` statements specify Trino types that are then

>   mapped to remote types on the data source. Predicates like ``WHERE`` also use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  mapped to types on the remote data source. Predicates like ``WHERE`` also use
```

Author: Applied

>   Trino to data source mappings in order to ensure that the predicate's syntax
>   can resolve on the remote data source.

Reviewer: WDYT?
```suggestion
  these mappings in order to ensure that the predicate is
  translated to valid syntax on the remote data source.
```

Author: Applied
